well Harden Lang is vice president for
programs and policy at refugees
International he joins us live from
Washington DC Harden good to have you
with us so uh there's been widespread
condemnation around the world against
Israel uh for killing these Sade workers
from the world's Central Kitchen what's
your response Harden to the attack it
seemed intentional despite Israel saying
it
wasn't the strike on world Central
Kitchen is as unacceptable as it is
tragic you know the death of 7 a workers
under any circumstances um would be you
know unacceptable and not permitted
under an international humanitarian law
that they'd be targeted in this fashion
this situation is particularly inrees
not only for the nature and scope of the
incident in question but as the UN
Secretary General earlier said because
it comes at such like a bookend or a
milestone in such a tempo of operations
of seeing 196 almost 200 humanitarian
Aid workers killed in the last six
months I I've been doing this work for a
number of decades and I don't think I've
ever seen this pace of death amongst
humanitarian Aid workers in any conflict
yeah and that's so now I was going to
say Harden that's an interesting point
you make because what is clear following
this attack is just how dangerous Gaza
is for Aid workers let's remember as you
were saying there it's not just
International Aid workers who died
yesterday more than 200 workers mostly
from the UN have been killed in Gaza
since October the
7th indeed and many of them are
Palestinian and they are they deserve
the exact same sort of protections uh
and and condemnation under international
law as their International counterparts
um the thing that also really stands out
about this is the fact that world
Central Kitchen had been uh coordinating
so closely with the Israeli military and
Israeli Defense Forces in its operations
in north and Central Gaza um and this is
a time when very few organizations are
actually providing humanitarian relief
or Aid or food Aid in the North in the
midst of a famine I think it's really
important to emphasize this point
because you know a number of folks
number of uh reports talk about famine
being imminent in Gaza like the data
actually suggests pretty strongly that
famine is underway in core Pockets
especially in the north and this is what
the maritime option was developed um to
respond to with the B of the pier and
the humanitarian Aid coming through off
that Pier to World Central by World
Central Kitchen and so in the midst of a
famine this is going to have a huge
chilling effect as we're already seeing
on operations that cannot be considered
this point I mean right now what we need
more than anything else is a massive
scaling of humanitarian operations
across a number of sectors across the
entirety of Gaza and this is going to
set us back significantly Harden um
world Central Kitchen and other groups
have now paused their operations in Gaza
because of this attack talk us through
briefly uh the challenges facing Aid
groups in getting food into Gaza uh with
all 2.3 million people there now facing
either starvation or acute food
shortages right there are a series of
challenges that are in that that a
groups are facing the first and some of
the largest challenges are actually
getting the food Aid into or any Aid
into Gaza itself so for example we have
huge backlogs of trucks in Egypt and
Jordan and elsewhere trying to make
their way into um Gaza to deliver all
forms of humanitarian assistance and a
series of different restrictions which
are being put on them largely by the
Israeli authorities are keeping those
trucks from actually Crossing in once
you're inside it's a question of
distribution and there there are a
series of different challenges one The
Limited number of infrastructure trucks
and other sort of vehicles to move
things around that are there and are
operational two there is some concern
over the like increasing like dynamics
of the security environment in terms of
um sort of popular discontent the
breakdown of Law and Order robberies Etc
but the real challenge that we're
hearing from every Aid worker on the
ground now is it's more strikes by
Israel the military uh pace of military
activity and the targeting of Aid
workers is the number one thing that's
preventing people from moving around so
you have a whole challenges of getting
in and you can see actually growing
frustration with the inability get
trucks in or leading the United States
and others to support this Maritime
option and then dropping aid from the
air both of which are massively
inefficient all right Harden Lang we
have to leave it there thank you very
much indeed for your time and your
analysis Harden thank you thank you now
the Palestinian Authority has relaunched
its bid for full membership of the
United Nations it wants the security
Council to vote this month on its
application which was first filed back
in 2011 at the moment the Palestinians
are considered a non-member Observer
state by by the UN full membership can
only be approved by the security Council
in the past the US has said it would
veto any such
measure members of the United Nations
security Council are calling for
deescalation and accountability
following that Israeli air strike on the
Iranian Consulate in Syria Monday strike
in Damascus killed two senior commanders
of the Islamic revolutionary guard along
with 12 other people Iran's been calling
for both Israel and the US to be held
accountable for the attack Russia
requested the emergency meeting of the
security Council and describe the nature
of the strikes as
Reckless this is not the first attack
carried out by Israel in a densely
populated area of the capital Damascus
which has generated high risks of mass
casualties among civilians since the
beginning of the escalation of the
Palestinian Israeli confrontation on
October 7th the number of Civilian
attacks on Syrian civilian
infrastructure and Syria's neighbors has
multiplied as the White House has stated
the United States had no involvement in
the reported strike yesterday in Syria
neither did we know about it ahead of
time we have communicated this directly
to
Iran we cannot confirm any information
about this event as We Gather details
one thing is clear Iran and its proxy
and partner groups need to avoid
escalating tensions in the region the
choice is
Stark either uphold the principle of the
UN Charter and and on international law
or risk plunging into chaos and
insecurity on the regional spillover
it's now crystal clear that Israel
ongoing destabilized and irresponsible
actions and atrocities against the
nations in our region are a real threat
to Regional and International Peace and
security well Iran has warned it will
retaliate for the air strike on its
Consul building in Damascus Iran supreme
leader Ayatollah aliam says Israel will
be punished and that it'll be made to
regret its actions president ibraim RI
condemn the attack as a clear violation
of international regulations which will
not go unanswered Gabriel Alando has
more on that security council meeting at
the
UN there was a lot to unpack there but I
think there are some main themes that we
saw woven through if you will and that's
pretty much accountability a lot of
people wanted accountability uh for
Israel for this attack and I think it
was because so many diplomats that work
in this building really raised their
eyebrows if you will because of this
attack because it was against a
diplomatic facility and there are a
whole host of international conventions
including the UN Charter itself that
speak about how it's supposed to protect
uh diplomatic facility so it's was a
gross violation of of these
International conventions if you will
and and I think that's why so many uh
speakers uh uh Nations that were on the
the security Council spoke out against
this and you also heard definitely a
call for deescalation uh really worries
that countries could use their proxies
uh in retaliation and there was calls to
really restrain uh in any sort of
retaliation on that front but clearly uh
it was Russia that echoed uh the view I
think of a lot of council members saying
that it was Israel being being the
aggressor and they are the ones that are
responsible for any retaliatory action